Growing conditions

Basil is sensitive to cold. Plant it outdoors after all risk of spring frost is past. Leave 25 to 30 cm between plants.

Basil requires heat and full sun. It does best in slightly acidic soil (pH between 6 and 7) with plenty of organic matter. This genus requires well-drained soil and regular watering, because it does not tolerate over-watering or being allowed to dry out thoroughly. Basil gives good yields in fertile soil. Spread the equivalent of 5 kg/m2 of aged compost at planting time.  

Remove the inflorescences as soon as they appear, as the plant will produce many fewer leaves when in flower. To delay flowering and encourage the growth of new leafy shoots, remove the first two or three pairs of leaves under the inflorescence.

It is best to plant basil in a new site every year to avoid fusarium wilt, a fungal disease that survives in the soil and causes these plants to wilt and die. Avoid poorly drained sites and ideally choose plants that are resistant to the disease or certified fusarium wilt-free.
Propagation

Basil is mainly propagated from seed.

Sow indoors six weeks before the last frost. It is best to sow purple-leaved cultivars 10 to 15 days earlier, because most of them are slow growers. Transplant the seedlings into pots 7 to 10 cm in diameter. The pots may be sown directly in the ground, without removing the seedlings. To encourage bushy growth, remove the terminal shoot once the plant has formed three pairs of leaves. Remove all flowers. Seeds germinate in 5 to 8 days at 22-24oC and remain viable for 8 years.
Use

Culinary uses: “Genovese” and “Foglia de Lattuga” type sweet basils go well with most types of food, especially tomatoes and tomato-based products. Spicy basils are used in Asian cuisine. Lemon-scented ones are used in salad dressings, beverages and desserts. As a general rule, cultivars with coloured leaves are less flavourful, but make good ornamentals and are useful in vinegars and salads.

Harvesting: Young shoots are usually harvested as needed. To avoid premature die-back, keep at least four or five rows of leaves on each stem. It is best to harvest the entire plant at once in fall when temperatures below 5oC are forecast. Handle the leaves carefully, as damaged leaves turn black readily.

Storage: Dried basil loses its flavour quickly, so it is best to use it fresh or frozen.

    Fresh: Basil keeps for several days in an airtight container stored in the refrigerator vegetable drawer.
    Frozen: Blanch leaves and freeze them in ice cubes.
    Dried: Strip the leaves from the stem and spread them out to dry in a warm, dark, well-ventilated location. Once dry, store the leaves in an opaque, airtight container.
