Planting

Select a sunny location and well-draining soil. Although peas can grow in part shade, they won’t be as sweet or productive as those grown in full sun. Prepare the soil, preferably in the fall, mixing in aged manure and/or compost, and mulch well—peas like well-draining soil.
When to Plant Peas

    Sow seeds 4 to 6 weeks before the last spring frost date when the soil is cool or when it is at the desired temperature. Peas planted in cold (40°F) soil will germinate slowly; peas planted in soil that is at least 60°F (but not more than 85°F) will catch up.
    Snow will not hurt emerging pea plants, but several days with temperatures in the teens might. Be prepared to plant again if the first peas don’t make it. Alternatively, try starting your peas in a cold frame.
    A second round of peas can be planted in the late summer or early fall, approximately 6 to 8 weeks before your first fall frost date.

Here are some more tips on when to start planting peas.

Pea pods on plant
How to Plant Peas

    Peas are best direct-seeded right in the ground and do not like their roots disturbed. But transplanting is possible if you start seeds in biodegradable pots; you’ll transplant the pot and all into the garden, and the pot will disintegrate.
    Where spring is long and wet, plant seeds in raised garden beds.
    To speed germination, soak seeds in water overnight before planting.
    Sow seeds 1 inch deep (slightly deeper if the soil is dry) and about 2 inches apart. Do not thin.
    Plant rows 7 inches apart.
    Regarding crop rotation, do not plant peas in the same place more than once every four years.
    Like those of other legumes, pea roots fix nitrogen in the soil, making it available for other plants. 
    In terms of fertilizer, peas need phosphorus and potassium, but excess nitrogen will encourage foliage growth instead of flowers or pods. Learn more about soil amendments.
    Bush peas can reach 18 to 30 inches tall.  Pole types can grow at least 4 to 6 feet tall. Both types benefit from support (especially bush peas above 2 feet and all pole peas). Install thin tree branches or twiggy sticks (pea sticks), trellises, chicken wire, strings, or netting before plants establish their shallow roots. See instructions on how to build trellises and supports for peas.
    Water to keep the soil moist. If seeds wash out of the soil, poke them back into it.

Peas on St. Patrick’s Day

It’s an old American tradition to plant peas on St. Patrick’s Day! Our retired editor, Janice, shows us her trick on how to plant peas in early spring if there’s snow! 

St. Patrick’s Day (March 17) is the traditional day for planting peas, one of the easiest plants to grow. It’s said to bring luck come harvest time. And it makes sense: Soil is typically thawed and workable, and these veggies prefer to get started in chilly spring weather.


Growing

    Water peas sparsely with no more than 1 inch per week, unless the plants are wilting. We don’t want to encourage pea rot. But also do not let the plants dry out. If this happens, no pods will be produced. 
    Gently remove intrusive weeds by hand. If necessary, hoe or cultivate, but carefully avoid disturbing peas’ shallow, fragile roots. 
    Pea leaves turn yellow for several reasons. Often, this is due to the stress of hot weather. Provide partial shade (e.g., row covers) and water properly during the hottest time of day.
    Fertilizing plants is not usually required if the plants are mulched deeply with grass clippings, shredded leaves, or another biodegradable material.

Varieties

Shelling Peas: Also known as garden or sweet peas, these are the most common types of peas available. Some good varieties to try include:

    ‘Green Arrow’: 2- to 3-foot vines; no support required; high yields; tolerant of mildew and Fusarium wilt
    ‘Lincoln’: 2- to 3-foot vines; no support required; tolerant of mildew and Fusarium wilt
    The classic ‘Wando’: suitable for freezing
    ‘Thomas Laxton’: high sugar content
    ‘Progress No. 9’: good disease resistance
    ‘Little Marvel’: grows only 15 inches tall

Snap Peas: You eat the entire tender pod of snap peas. Some good varieties to try are:

    ‘Sugar Ann’: vines grow only 2 feet tall, no support required.
    ‘Sugar Snap’: the original (Calvin’s), just brought back; carried only by Johnny’s Selected Seeds
    ‘Early Snap’: an early-maturing version produces peas 10 to 14 days earlier than ‘Sugar Snap’
    ‘Super Sugar Mel’: produces 4-inch-long, very sweet pods

Snow Peas: Common in Chinese cooking, these flat-podded peas have edible pods. Some good varieties to try include:

    ‘Mammoth Melting Sugar’: 4- to 5-foot vines; stringless pods; wilt tolerant
    ‘Oregon Sugar Pod II’: grows only 2-1/2 feet tall
    ‘Snowbird’: resistant to fusarium wilt

Harvesting
How do you know when peas are ready to be picked?

Most varieties of peas are ready to harvest 60 to 70 days after planting. Peas mature quickly, so check daily once you see the flowers in bloom.

    Pick snow peas when the delicate pods begin to show immature seeds inside.
    Gather snap peas when the pods become plump yet are still glossy and filled with sweet-tasting peas.
    Pick shell peas before the pods become waxy.

Pea pods growing in a garden Photo credit: StanRohrer/GettyImages
How to Harvest Peas

    Harvest peas in the morning after the dew has dried; they are crispiest then.
    Harvest regularly to encourage more pods to develop. 
    Use two hands when you pick peas to avoid damaging the plant. Hold the vine with one hand and pull the pods off with the other.
    Peas are at the peak of flavor immediately after harvest.
    Pea pods that have hardened or turned a dull color are overmature. Mature plants usually stop producing and die back in hot summer weather.
    If you missed your peas’ peak period, you can still pick, dry, and shell them for use in winter soups.

Shelled peas in a hand
How to Store Peas

    Store peas in the refrigerator for about 5 days. Place in paper bags, then wrap in plastic.
    Or, freeze peas: Shell sweet peas, blanch, immerse in cold water, drain, and pack in sealed containers.
    De-string/trim snow or snap peas and prepare as above.

Gardening Products
Pests/Diseases
Pest/Disease	Type	Symptoms	Control/Prevention
Aphids 	Insect	Misshapen/yellow leaves; distorted flowers/fruit; sticky “honeydew” (excrement produced by aphids); sooty, black mold that forms on honeydew; large presence of ants on plants	Grow companion plants to either attract aphids away (nasturtiums) or repel them outright (basil, rosemary, strong-scented plants); knock aphids off plants with water spray, apply insecticidal soap; put banana or orange peel around plants; wipe leaves with a 1-2% solution of liquid dish soap and water every 2-3 days for 2 weeks; add native plants to attract aphid predators. Find images and more information about aphids here.
Fusarium Wilt	Fungus	Plants wilt (sometimes on just one side) in daytime; leaves turn yellow (lower ones first); later, entire plant wilts/dies; growth is stunted; stem cross section reveals brown discoloration	Destroy infected plants; avoid excessive nitrogen in soil; in acidic soils, raise pH to 7.0; choose resistant varieties; disinfect tools between use; practice crop rotation
Downy Mildew	Fungus	Yellow, angular spots on upper leaf surfaces that turn brown; white/purple/gray cottony growth on leaf undersides only; distorted leaves; defoliation	Remove plant debris; choose resistant varieties; ensure good air circulation; avoid overhead watering
Mexican Bean Beetles	Insect	Lacey, skeletonized leaves; dark holes on pods	Remove by hand; purchase and release beneficial wasp Pediobius foveolatus when beetle larvae are observed; destroy severely infested plants. Find images and more infomation about Mexican bean beetles here.
Powdery Mildew	Fungus	Typically, white spots on upper leaf surfaces expand to flour-like coating over entire leaves; foliage may yellow/die; distortion/stunting of leaves/flowers	Destroy infected leaves or plants; choose resistant varieties; plant in full sun, if possible; ensure good air circulation; spray plants with 1 tsp baking soda dissolved in 1 qt water; remove infected plant matter from garden and destroy (don’t compost). Find images and more information about powdery mildew here.
Root-knot Nematodes	Insect	Roots become “knotted” or galled; plants stunted/yellow/wilted	Destroy affected plant matter (especially roots); choose resistant varieties; expose soil to sun (solarize); add aged manure/compost; disinfect gardening tools between uses; till soil in autumn; practice crop rotation
Wireworms	Insect	Pest affects newly planted seeds and young plants. Seeds hollowed; seedlings severed; stunting/wilting; roots eaten	Sow seeds in warm soil for quick germination; provide good drainage; remove plant debris at end of season; practice crop rotation. If infestation is bad enough, trap by digging 2- to 4-inch-deep holes every 3 to 10 feet, fill with mix of germinating beans/corn/peas or potato sections as bait, cover with soil or a board; in 1 week, uncover and kill collected wireworms.
White Mold	Fungus	Pods near the ground show cottony mold and black patches, and they are slimy rather than leathery or dry, becoming inedible. 	Gather up affected pods and compost them. Healthy plants may produce a second crop if dry weather returns in time. To prevent, make sure plants get good air circulation and plenty of sun to dry quickly after rains. Use mulch. Avoid watering from overhead; water at soil level.

Soil testing and fertilizer

    Have your soil tested. 
        If your soil tests high in phosphorus, use low phosphorus (such as 32-3-10, 27-3- 3, or 25-3-12) or no phosphorus (such as 30-0-10 or 24-0-15) fertilizer.
    Many soils, from sandy to heavy clay, are good for peas as long as you have well-drained soil.
    Peas grow best in soil with a pH between 6 and 7.5.
    Use well-rotted manure or compost at planting.
    Continuous use of high phosphorus fertilizer, such as 10-10-10 or 15-30-15, or high rates of manure or manure compost results in phosphorus buildup in the soil.
        Although phosphate fertilizer applied to soil is bound tightly and resistant to movement in the soil, some runoff may occur. It can then become a major pollution concern in our lakes, rivers and streams.
    Do not use any fertilizer containing a weed killer ("Weed and Feed"), as it may kill your vegetable plants.

Choosing pea varieties

    Nearly all pea varieties on the market are open-pollinated, rather than hybrids. You can save mature pea seed for planting the following season.
    Tall vine varieties can grow up to five feet tall. The vines need a trellis to support them as they climb. These varieties grow peas over a longer period.
    Shorter or "bush" types are only two to three feet tall and will flower and then set their crops all at once. 
    Leafless and semi-leafless vines may be less prone to disease. They also may be better able to stand without a trellis, because the tendrils tangle themselves up into a mass.
    Other qualities include number of peas per pod, length of pod, days to maturity, and stringed or stringless pods for edible-pod types.

    Garden centers and seed catalogs carry a wide selection of pea varieties. Some varieties are resistant to common pea diseases, including root rots and powdery mildew. Some seeds have a fungicide treatment to improve germination in cold soils.

Starting seeds

Pea growing season is short wherever a cool spring turns quickly to a hot summer, as it does in much of Minnesota. Areas near Lake Superior and in the far northern part of the state may stay cooler into the summer and have a longer time to grow peas.

Most varieties of peas need about 60 days of growth before harvest. But they will stop growing and not produce flowers or pods once temperatures get above 85°F, as often happens in June.

Although the plants do need full sun, peas produced in hot weather may also have poor quality. It is important to get an early start on planting. Preparing the planting area the previous fall may be a good idea.

    Plant the seed as soon as the soil has thawed and is workable.
    Plant tall, vining varieties at the base of the trellis in a single row. Trellises can have two vertical stakes with either string or netting between them.
    You can plant shorter bush types in a single row near a trellis or in a row, between 12 and 18 inches wide, where the plants will cling to and support each other.
    Treat the pea seed carefully. Cracked seeds are unlikely to germinate, especially in cool, moist soil in early spring.
    Place the seeds in a shallow trench, six to seven inches apart. For a wide row, broadcast the seed over the prepared seedbed, with seeds about two inches apart in all directions.
    Evenly place the seeds into a narrow trench in the soil. Make sure they are at a uniform depth and cover them with one inch of soil.
    Firm the soil over the seeds. You may make a second planting a week later, and another a week after that, for a longer harvest period.

Young pea plants can survive light frost and will grow at any temperature above 40°F. Good growing temperatures are between 55°F and 65°F. Once the plants have started to flower and set a crop, frost can be damaging. Watch for any forecast of late spring frost and cover the plants with sheets or row covers if necessary.
Watering

    Because peas grow during a wetter and cooler time of year, you may not need to water them at all.
    During dry springs, you may need to water for good pea growth.
    Try to water the soil, not the vines, to prevent disease.
    Soak the soil when watering, to a depth of at least one inch each week during the growing season.
    Sandy soils may need watering more often.
    Mulching three to four inches deep with grass clippings, weed-free straw, or other organic material will help keep soil moisture and prevent weeds.

Controlling weeds

    Before planting, cultivate with a hoe or other tool, and hand-pull large weeds.
    If peas can get a head start, they can outcompete weeds. But if the weeds get a head start, the pea plants will not grow well.
    Peas have roots that can be close to the surface of the soil. It is important not to cultivate too deeply. Be careful not to damage the plants.
    A wide row of peas, with bushy plants forming a large mass, usually stays weed-free within the row. This setup only needs weed control between rows.

Harvest and storage

Once the pods have begun to fill with peas, observe the plants carefully, sampling the crop each day. Harvest as soon as the peas have reached full size, slightly larger than the dry seed you planted. They will also be sweet, tender, thin-skinned and non-starchy.

Once peas have reached maturity, they will quickly decline in quality. They will be inedible as fresh peas within one to three days.

Over-mature peas have a starchy flavor, less sweetness, tough skins and a firm or hard interior.

Do not pick the peas before they mature. The peas will be too small, with poor flavor and sweetness.

You can freeze peas. Shelling peas and edible pod peas are good candidates.
Shelling peas

After picking the peas, shell immediately and cool. You can also cool them right away for shelling later. The best way to remove heat from a large harvest of peas on a warm day is to dunk them in very cold water until chilled, then dry and refrigerate. Once cooled, they will hold their quality for more than a week in the refrigerator.
Snow peas

To harvest snow peas, wait until the pods have reached their full length as described on the seed packet. The peas within the pod should be visible only as small traces. If allowed to mature further, the pods may become tough.

Some varieties have fibrous strings along the edges of the pods. Remove these strings before cooking. As with shelling peas, it is important to cool snow peas quickly after picking them.
Sugar snap peas

To harvest sugar snap peas, wait until the pods appear almost filled with peas. Sample often as the crop matures. Harvest when peas and pods are still sweet, juicy and tender. Remember that pea quality quickly decreases once they reach maturity. Cool your peas soon after you pick them. Before cooking, you will need to remove the strings of some varieties.

After harvest, typically in June, remove any trellises, and turn the pea plants into the soil. Wait at least two weeks for the soft tissues to break down, then seed or transplant a second crop for fall harvest.

You can also plant a cover crop or put in some annual flowers.
Pea shoots

To harvest pea shoots for stir-fries or steaming, cut six-inch lengths of vine. Edible-pod varieties are good for shoot harvest. Some cooks prefer leafless and semi-leafless types, finding the tendrils tenderer and sweeter than leafy shoots.
Dried peas

Allow the pods to ripen on the plants until they are dry and starting to turn brown, with the seeds rattling inside. This may be as long as a month after you would normally harvest the peas for fresh eating. Pull the plants from the garden once they start to dry and bring them indoors. Hang the plants upside-down in a well-ventilated place to dry completely.

Once the pods and peas are completely dry, strip the pods from the plants and shell out by hand. For a larger crop, place the pods in a burlap sack and thresh by hitting the bag with a stick.

The seeds are likely to have some chaff once separated from the pods and plants. Winnowing is the process of removing little bits of plant material from the seed. Take the seeds outdoors on a dry, windy day and pour them from container to container, allowing the wind to blow through the stream of seeds. The wind will blow away the lightweight plant fiber.

efore we start, please note:

    This post addresses snap and shelling peas (aka. edible peas.) Sweet peas, which are grown for their flower and are not edible, are an entirely different beast.

    Edible peas fall into two general categories. Shelling peas are typically grown to maturity on the vine and then the shell is removed before eating. Snap peas are harvested before they are fully mature on the vine and usually eaten whole with the shell on.

Q: How close together can you seed/transplant snap, snow, and shelling peas? 
A: Pea plants should be spaced 1-2 inches apart. Peas can grow well when spaced close together, so don’t be afraid to pack them in a little. If you do plant them this close together, space rows several feet apart. Over-planting reduces air circulation and makes your plants more susceptible to mildew. 

Q: When can you plant peas? 
A: Snap peas are ready to harvest around 60 days after they’re planted, and are a cool-weather crop. Your planting date will depend on your growing region. Peas grow well when temperatures are between 55-65 degrees F, and they don’t germinate or grow well when temperatures get above 75°F. The climatic limitations make peas a great crop for spring or fall planting. In Seattle, we plant our spring peas from mid-February through late-March. 

You can also plant peas for fall harvest by seeding them in late summer. We’ve found that this technique can be tricky for a few reasons:

    Mid-July tends to be when gardens are the fullest, so it can be difficult to find space to plant peas for fall. 

    You have to plant them in the height of summer to give them enough time to mature before the growing season comes to a close. Often, summer temperatures are just too warm for peas to germinate and perform well. We’ve had some success sowing varieties with a slightly shorter lifespan (maturing in about 50 days) in the fall. Sugar Ann and Tom Thumb are some good fall planting options. These varieties tend to also have a shorter growth habit than longer season varieties.

Q: Should you direct-seed or transplant peas? 
A: Both work well, but we prefer to transplant.

We tend to transplant peas because birds and slugs love newly buried pea seeds and tiny pea sprouts. We find that transplanted peas are less likely to be eaten by hungry critters. 

If you want to direct seed, just keep a close eye on your planting! Direct-seeded peas usually germinate within a week. If you notice that your new sprouts are getting chomped by slugs or birds, just reseed as soon as possible. If your seed doesn’t germinate at all, or germination is spotty, gently dig around your seeded row and see if the seed is still there. Crows and other birds love eating them whole. You can fill in a spotty row with new seeds and the later-planted ones often catch up with the original row.  

If you are having pest issues, sprinkle your planting with iron phosphate (to keep the slugs at bay) and drape some bird netting over your bed. After your peas have grown to about 3 inches in height, gently remove the bird netting. Be sure not to break any of the growing tips on your pea plants as you do this. If you forget to remove your bird netting, your plants will start to get caught in the netting and you’ll have created a new issue for yourself to negotiate. :)

Transplant your seedlings into the garden when they are between 2-4” tall. Any taller and they become fragile enough to break during planting (they also tend to grab onto each other in the tray, making it harder to separate them). They do grow quickly, so if you end up with taller transplants than intended, just be very careful when transplanting, taking the time to gently separate them when removing from the tray. 

A note on timing: If sown early enough (in the PNW, sometime in March), direct seeded peas often catch up with transplanted peas once it comes time to start producing.

Q: What is inoculant, and should I use it on my peas? 
A: In the garden, inoculants are bacteria or fungi that are intentionally added to the soil or seed of a crop to promote a healthier plant.  A healthy and active microbial population is essential to the success of your crops.  By adding certain microbes directly to the soil, you can help create an especially robust soil ecosystem in your garden.  

The most common garden inoculant is a bacteria known as Rhizobium (often sold simply as “garden inoculant” which is added to the seeds of legume crops at planting time.  The most common garden legumes are peas and beans, which are supported by the same strain of bacteria (as are lentils).  Additional strains exist for soybeans, peanuts and other outlying food crops.  

The bacteria forms a symbiotic relationship with the root nodules of legume crops which allows the plants to absorb nitrogen from the air, use it for growth and deposit it into the soil.  Legume plants and crops are unique in this ability, and it is usually referred to as “nitrogen fixation”.  Even though the air we breathe is 78% nitrogen (N2), plants can’t use it in this form.  It must be converted into ammonium nitrogen (NH4+) or nitrate nitrogen (NO3-) before plants can absorb it and use it for growth.  Rhizobium allow the legumes to convert N2 from the air into NH4.  This is helpful for the legume crop, but also leaves behind a store of NH4 in the soil for the next plants in the garden to use.  

Inoculant is inexpensive and the application is easy.  There are numerous techniques to mix the inoculant powder with the seeds, but the most effective is to create a “slurry”.  It is best to inoculate the seeds just prior to planting, so separate out the seeds you need for the planting, pour them into a plastic or ceramic container, sprinkle inoculant onto the seeds, and add a few drops of water until the powder sticks to the seeds and coats them lightly.  The exact proportion of powder is not crucial, a little bit goes a long way and chances are that you are much more likely to over inoculate then under, and that’s okay, you can’t really add too much.  The only downside is wasting the inoculant.  

Q: What is the best way to trellis peas?
A: There are a few great ways to support your pea plants. 

First, a few notes about how peas grow:

    Peas are a vining plant that holds onto your trellis with tendrils. However,  their tendrils are relatively weak compared to those of other crops like pole beans. This means that they need extra training to keep them attached to any trellis. Without ongoing training, they are likely to pull off of your trellis under their own weight. This usually snaps the top of the vines and reduces your overall harvest. 

    Remember that pea vines are very delicate, which means that you don’t want to try and move or adjust them very much once they are growing. So your training technique needs to be very delicate to help keep your vines intact. 

    Different types of peas have different mature heights. For example, Oregon Giant snow peas only grow about 4’ tall, but Sugar Snap peas can grow up to 7’ (or more). The height of your trellis should accommodate the variety you’re planting. This is one of the many reasons we designed the Freyr Trellis, it can adjust in both height and length, making it easy to grow different crops and different varieties of crops.  Fortunately, the tops of any pea plant can be trimmed off. We often trim our peas 3-6” above the top of our trellis to make sure the vines don’t fall over and snap. In fact, trimming your tops once your plants have reached their mature height can actually encourage your plants to set more blossoms on the lower sections, making harvesting easier. 

We’ve been growing peas for decades and have tried every trellising option:

    Bamboo tipi: You can create a simple tipi structure and train your peas up the poles. To keep the vines attached to the trellis, make sure to wrap the entire planting with twine every week as they grow. 

    Pea netting: Setting up a net gives your peas a great surface to grow up. Their tendrils will wrap around the net and this technique tends to make harvesting and training easier than growing on a tipi. However, since the plants are heavy and fragile, it’s still a good idea to add extra pieces of horizontal twine to help hold the peas against the net as they grow. This is very easy and only takes a few minutes a week. It can give you a perfect planting of peas. 

    Horizontal strings: Similar to using a pea net, we also love to just use horizontal strings to wrap around our pea planting. The technique is simple, just wrap a piece of twine across both the front and back of the planting. Repeat this every 6-12 inches as they grow. To add extra support, you can tie the front and back strings together (or use a trellis clip to hold them together) check out the video below to see how we do this on our Freyr trellis.

Q: Peas only take 58 days to mature, so if I plant them now (in early March), I can pull them and plant my tomatoes in their place in early May, right?
A: Probably not. 

This is a common point of confusion and it comes down to two things:

    Not all growing days are created equal. Early spring days and early fall days may technically be part of your growing season, but plants are going to grow much more slowly in these cooler and shorter days than they will during the long, warm days of summer. This means that even though peas need to be started while the soil temperature is still cool, they won’t get going until things warm up a bit.

    Fruiting crops have an extended harvest period. Peas are a fruiting crop, which generally means that they will produce many fruits over an extended period of time, as opposed to a head of lettuce, which is one done and ready to harvest for a short period of time. Your peas might START producing after 58 days in the ground, but that doesn’t mean you want to pick the first 10 peas and call it a season. You want those plants to continue producing as long as possible. After all, you’ve waited 58 days and probably dedicated some valuable garden space to the plants. 

We tend to remove March-planted peas from gardens in mid-July. This is closer to 110-120 days after planting. At this point in the season the heat is starting to get to the peas and they start to get powdery mildew. By this point we’ve harvested pounds and pounds of fruit off of the hard-working plants over an extended period of time.

Since we generally plant tomatoes in mid-May, there are actually 2 months of overlap when both peas and tomatoes are in the garden.

In short, 58 days is the minimum amount of time it’ll take for your plants to begin producing, but you’ll usually need at least another 30-60 days to capture your full harvest. Therefore, it’s best to replace a spring planting of peas with a shorter season crop like cucumbers or climbing zucchini, if you wanted to utilize vertical growing space; or salad greens, beets, carrots, or fall brassicas such as broccoli and kale if not. 

Q: How do I harvest peas?
A: Peas are very easy to harvest, simply pick them right off the vines. A few tips to get the most out of your plants:

    Pick snap peas early and often. Snap peas typically taste best when picked small so they are still tender. Also, picking your fruit every few days will encourage more fruit production, so they more you harvest the more you get to harvest later! 

    Wait to harvest shelling peas until the pods have swollen and the peas inside are visible. Since shelling peas are grown only for the seeds inside (and not the pod), you want to wait until these are sized up which makes them easier to harvest and makes sure that you actually have something worth picking. If you pick too early, the seeds inside will just be micro-sized! 

    As mentioned above, consider trimming the top of your vines when they reach the top of your trellis. This will prevent the tops from snapping and encourage additional blossom (and therefore fruit) production on the lower parts of the vines. 