Growing conditions

Plant thyme in full sun. Space plants 20 cm apart and leave 60 cm between rows. This genus prefers light, very well drained and slightly alkaline soil (pH between 6 and 7.5). Thyme is less aromatic and dies back more readily in heavy, wet soil. If you have clay or poorly drained soil, it is best to create a raised bed for this plant. It does not require nutrient-rich soil. For a good yield, add 2 to 3 kg/m2 of aged compost annually. This plant is drought resistant.

In spring, cut back the previous year’s stems by one half. Such rejuvenation pruning will encourage the growth of new, non-woody stems and a compact habit.

French thyme varieties with greyish leaves need winter protection. They can be grown indoors if given bright light and cool temperatures.
Propagation

Although thyme is perennial, it is best to produce new plants every 2 to 3 years, because they become woody and straggly with age. Most cultivars can be propagated by division, stem cuttings or layering.

Seed: Sow indoors 8 to 10 weeks before the last frost. Seeds germinate in 6 to 8 days at 20-22oC and remain viable for 3 years.

Stem cuttings: Take a 10 cm long shoot from the tip of a stem, remove the leaves at the base of the shoot and place the bare stem in a porous, moist potting mix (e.g.: ½ potting soil and ½ perlite). Place the cuttings in a well-lit spot, out of direct sunlight, with high humidity (e.g.: sealed inside a clear plastic bag). The first roots should appear within 4 to 6 weeks. Cuttings will root faster if they are dipped in rooting hormones and the soil is kept warm.

Layering: Choose a flexible stem growing near the ground. Strip a few leaves from the centre of the stem and cover the bare part of the stem with soil.

Division: A plant may be divided if it is very bushy near the base. Divide it in spring, taking care to keep a few rooted stems in each clump.
Use

Culinary uses: Thyme’s distinctive, sharp and pungent aroma complements a wide variety of dishes. It is used with meat, as well as with vegetables, fruit, eggs, stuffing, cheese and marinades. It is also added to Creole dishes to season fish and grilled meat.

Thyme goes well with most other herbs. It is a key ingredient in a number of herb blends: bouquet garni, herbes de Provence, Zahtar (Jordanian) and Dukka (Egyptian). Heat does not damage thyme’s flavour, so it can be added at the beginning of a recipe.

Harvesting: Harvest young, non-woody stems as soon as they start to flower.

Storage: Unlike most other culinary herbs, thyme has a stronger flavour and aroma when dried.

    Fresh: Thyme keeps for over a week in the refrigerator when wrapped in a damp paper towel.
    Frozen: Freeze sprigs on a cookie sheet and then store them in a freezer container.
    Dried: Spread non-woody stems out flat or hang them upside down in small bunches in a warm, dark, well-ventilated location. Once dry, strip the leaves from the stems and store them in an opaque, airtight container.  
