
Growing tomatoes
May 11, 2022Mario Lavoie

Already cultivated in the 5th century then spread in the 16th century by the Spaniards, the tomato, this queen of the vegetable garden, is the most cultivated fruit* in the world and is now the subject of a very profitable industry.

The tomato is known to be easy to grow, but its maintenance can intimidate new gardeners: it is a greedy plant that requires certain special care. However, the patient and caring gardener will be generously rewarded with a bountiful harvest.

The taste of a tomato freshly picked from the garden is in no way comparable to that of a tomato bought at the supermarket, it is well known!

* In botany, the tomato is considered a fruit since it is the product of a flower.

Which tomato to choose?

Talking about all the varieties of tomatoes is impossible: there are thousands of them for different uses and to suit all tastes. Certain cultivars are traditionally produced in Quebec, but new varieties appear each year in Quebec nurseries in order to broaden the range of flavors offered.

To choose the variety of tomatoes that suits you best, you need to ask yourself a few questions:

How much space is available?

Some varieties will stay smaller and take up less space. Micro tomatoes can even be grown inside the house!

What use do I want to make of my tomatoes? Is it for eating in salads or making sauces?

Some tomatoes are juicier while others will be meatier and more suitable for processing. If your goal is to eat fresh tomatoes in salads, you risk being disappointed by an Italian tomato intended for making sauces or by a storage tomato intended to be dried: the texture of these tomatoes, when unprocessed, can be be pasty, even floury, and their flavor rather ordinary.

Do I want all my tomatoes at once or would I like to be able to enjoy them over a longer period of time?

It can be profitable to have a single large harvest (for example to make sauces) rather than having several small harvests until the first frost.

Do I want a traditional tomato, similar to what I find on the grocery store shelves, or do I want to discover new flavors?

There are countless varieties that are not always available in supermarkets, such as the white tomato. This choice is entirely personal.
The calibers

Currant tomato

They are tiny! Very small tomatoes (only 3 to 4 g) very sweet which are carried by an extremely productive plant and so generous that it will be difficult to harvest everything. They are eaten fresh as a snack.

Variety to try : Little Sparrow (red, pictured)  

Cherry tomato

Meant to be eaten fresh, this little tomato is generally very sweet and makes a great accompaniment to salads and dips. Round, elongated or pear-shaped, it is particularly popular with children.

Varieties to try : Super sweet 100 (red in the photo) , Sugar gloss (red) , Cupid (pink).

Cocktail tomato

Larger than the cherry tomato, this tomato is fleshy, juicy and has a sweet and fruity aftertaste. They can be enjoyed fresh or cooked in sauce, stuffed or roasted.

Varieties to try: Black cherry (black, pictured) , Little Napoli (red)

Italian tomato

These are very fleshy tomatoes, with firm and dense flesh, not very juicy, and which contain few seeds. With a tangy and pronounced taste, they are perfect for being transformed into a sauce. They are usually elongated and have the disadvantage of being susceptible to apical necrosis (also called black ass).

Varieties to try : Roma (red, pictured) , Gladiator (red) , Big Mama (red)

Standard tomato

Available in different shapes and colors, this tomato is fleshy and juicy. These tomatoes generally have a good taste balanced between sweet and acidity. This is usually the type of tomato that is purchased at the grocery store.

Varieties to try : Super Fantastique (red) , Rose de Berne (pink, pictured) .

Tomato beefsteak

These are large, fleshy, juicy tomatoes with an excellent mild flavor. They are ideal in salsa, sauce, dip, in sandwiches, eaten fresh or on the grill. However, they are extremely demanding in fertilizer and less productive than other types.

Varieties to try : Beef Heart (red), Marmande (red, pictured)

The different colors of tomatoes

Red tomatoes

They have a high level of lycopene accompanied by a good tomato taste. Some varieties are less sweet and can be a little sour.

Variety to try : Sugar gloss (cherry, pictured)

Pink tomatoes

They have a sweeter taste and are less acidic than red tomatoes. They are usually juicier and are eaten fresh.

Varieties to try : Pink Brandywine (beefsteak), Pink girl (standard, pictured) .

Black tomatoes

They have an even higher level of lycopene with a very strong taste.

Varieties to try : Chocolate sprinkle (cherry) , Paul Robeson (standard, pictured) .

Green tomatoes

These are the mildest tomatoes and are very sweet. They are a good acid-sugar balance.

Varieties to try : Green Zebra (standard, pictured)

Variegated tomatoes

They have a fruitier taste with a good acid-sugar balance. They are sure values ​​as an aperitif and salads.

Varieties to try : Bumble Bee (cherry) , Pineapple (standard, pictured)

Orange tomatoes

These are those with the highest levels of vitamin A and carotenoids. They are known for being sweet.

Varieties to try : Chef's Choice Orange (standard) , Sungold (Cherry, pictured) .

Yellow tomatoes

They have a low level of lycopene and are more acidic than red tomatoes and oranges.

Varieties to try : Yellow Pear (cocktail, pictured) , Gold Mine (standard) , Lemon cherry .

Plant with determinate or indeterminate habit?

All tomato varieties are classified into two categories: determinate or indeterminate. It is important to know what type your tomato plant is because its growing condition will be affected.

Determined

These are plants with a known maximum height. The plant will produce a set amount of flower clusters before stopping growing, so the tomatoes are ready all at once. A set plant is ideal for those with limited space, as most plants will be less than a meter high at full maturity. For the production of sauce or other processed product, it can be interesting to have this type of plant so that the tomatoes are ready all at the same time and in the right quantity.

Varieties to try : Little Nappoli (Italian red) , Manitoba (standard red) .

Undetermined

Most common type. The plant can grow to over 1.5-2m tall and will produce tomatoes over a longer period (usually until the first frost), but in smaller quantities at a time.

Varieties to try : Marmande (Standard rouge) , Summer cider (Apricot beefsteak) .

There are now tomatoes with a semi-determinate shape: they behave like determinate ones, but can take on the dimensions of an indeterminate tomato like the Celebrity variety (red standard).

For growing in the house or even in a hanging basket, there are micro-tomato plants that are 30 centimeters tall when fully mature. They have a determinate habit and usually give an early harvest. Even though the plant is described as “micro”, the tomatoes are cherry sized and are very tasty! Try the varieties Red Robin (red) , Pinnochio Orange ( orange) , Birdie Rouge (red) , Yellow Canary (yellow) and Rosy finch (pink). Be careful, you must protect the foliage from rain if planted outside. Since the plant is small, it is close to the ground and more susceptible to fungal diseases caused by excess humidity.
Tomatoes in the vegetable garden

Once all risk of frost has passed and the nights are at least 10°C, you can transfer your tomato seedlings to the vegetable garden.

Acclimatization

Your plants left in the house, even under the best grow lights, are not used to the power of the sun. If you put your plants out directly into the strong sun, you risk burning them and losing all your work. Acclimation of plants outdoors generally takes 7 days. Start with a cloudy day, without strong winds, and place your seedlings in the shade before putting them back inside the house for the night. The next day, increase the duration to a few hours and, as the days go by, expose your seedlings more and more to the sun until you place them in their final location in the vegetable garden. If you don't have a shaded space (e.g. under a patio table or near a tree), you can use floating canvases that you fold into a few layers to protect your plants.

The plantation

Tomatoes can be grown in pots (minimum of 5 gallons, but ideally 20 to 25 gallons for tomatoes with an indeterminate habit), but they are even better in the ground. Choose an appropriate potting soil for your type of planting ( Soil container for urban vegetable garden 30 L for growing in containers or Passion Jardin planting soil 30 L for growing in the ground) and add a generous quantity of compost, such as Peat and Shrimp Compost 30L to the mixture (in a pot, the compost makes up 1/3 of the final mixture ). Do not put the compost in direct contact with the roots at the risk of burning them: mix evenly with the potting soil.

Bury your plant up to the first leaves. You can remove the leaves from the bottom of the plant to bury the plant deeper. Tomatoes have the advantage of being able to develop roots on their main stem. By burying them deeper, the plant will develop more roots, be more firmly anchored to the soil, be in a better position to obtain nutrients from the soil and will more easily resist diseases such as apical necrosis .

Tomatoes are particularly rich in calcium. To combat apical necrosis , a disease linked to a calcium deficiency, add Bionik marine calcium to the bottom of the planting hole (according to the quantities recommended on the package). Finally, add a dose of granulated chicken manure such as Natural Flower and Vegetable Fertilizer 4-5-7 , or another good vegetable fertilizer, around the plant according to the manufacturer's directions to avoid any nutrient deficiencies.

Don't forget to stake your plants, particularly if they are varieties with an indeterminate habit. In nature, tomato plants are a species of creeping ground cover that can spread over several meters (in greenhouses, tomato plants can reach more than 10 meters!). It is therefore necessary to stake them in order to contain them and make picking easier. Choose a sturdy tomato cage and install it immediately after planting so as not to disturb the roots. As your plants grow, guide them to contain them in the tomato cage. It may be necessary to add a bamboo stake during the summer if the plants take on an unexpected size and it is necessary to keep them upright (otherwise they may break under the weight of the fruits!) . Use specialized ties and do not overtighten them to allow stem growth and to avoid severing the plant under pressure.

Watering

Watering is the key element in successful tomato cultivation. If the plants lack water or, conversely, if they are constantly flooded, the roots will deteriorate and the plant will no longer be able to feed itself properly. Quickly, the plant will present diseases, deficiencies and will gradually weaken, compromising the harvest. The ideal is to maintain humidity in the soil without the soil becoming soggy. Before watering, wait until the surface soil is 5 to 10 cm dry. A hygrometer can be useful for measuring the humidity level in your soil. In order to avoid certain deficiencies such as apical necrosis (or black tomato cull ), it is important to be regular in your watering: the plants must not dry out completely or receive too much water.

If the plants are outside and can be watered by rain, still check if they have received enough water: the soil on the surface can be deceptive. It is also important to plant tomato plants in well-drained soil that does not accumulate rainwater in a particularly rainy summer.

Finally, to avoid thermal shock, you should not water with cold water on an afternoon of a day at 35°C. Prefer to water your plants in the morning: they are then able to assimilate water thanks to photosynthesis. It is also possible to water in the evening, but there is a greater chance that the water will stagnate in the soil and cause damage to the roots.

Fertilization

As mentioned earlier, tomato plants are very nutrient-intensive plants and draw a lot of energy from the soil. It is therefore necessary to fertilize them and add fertilizer regularly.

First, what is the difference between fertilizer and fertilizer? Fertilizer is usually sold in liquid or granular form to nourish the plant and soil, then will gradually disappear. Fertilizer is used on the soil to help improve it; for example, compost helps to aerate the soil and gives it a texture more conducive to the development of the plant. It is therefore necessary to provide the plant with both to meet all its needs.

During planting, it will have been provided with fertilizer in the form of granules, calcium and a good quantity of compost; the first needs are therefore met. Thereafter, once a month, add a dose of the fertilizer of your choice (granulated chicken manure works very well). You can supplement with a seaweed fertilizer every two weeks.

In mid-summer, add a layer of compost around your plants, or to the surface of your pots, which you mix with the first centimeters of soil. This action can be combined with adding fertilizer at the end of July or the beginning of August.

Gourmands

Suckers have been the subject of controversy among gardeners since the dawn of time: should we remove them or leave them on the plant? The suckers are secondary branches which form between the ramifications of the main stem. Although they eventually produce fruit, they also consume the plane's energy. On the other hand, the leaves of gourmands participate in precious photosynthesis. A recent scientific study showed that removing or not removing the suckers did not change the quantity of tomatoes that the plant would produce. You can therefore remove or not the gourmands according to your preferences. Note that it may be wise to remove some suckers in order to ventilate the plant and avoid fungal diseases.

August

In mid-August, cut off the tops of your tomato plants with indeterminate growth habit. This will have the effect of stopping the growth of the plant and will allow the plant to concentrate its efforts on ripening the fruits.
The main tomato diseases

Several diseases and deficiencies can affect tomato plants. Here are the most common:

Apical necrosis

Caused by a calcium deficiency (which comes from a lack of calcium in the soil or a lack of regularity in watering), apical necrosis is the most common imperfection in tomatoes. It can be recognized by a brownish spot under the tomato, which softens and collapses. It is not a disease in itself since when you add calcium and monitor watering, the problem disappears. Fruits affected by apical necrosis are still edible by removing the affected part.

Mildew

Downy mildew is a fungal disease that first attacks the foliage and then eventually the fruits when the disease is advanced. Firstly, it is characterized by yellowish spots which turn brown as they dry on the foliage. Then, downy mildew attacks the stems, forming irregular brown spots. At the same time, the fruits will begin to show spots similar to apical necrosis. This disease can lead to crop failure. To avoid this disease on your plants, space your plants so that air can circulate between them (mushrooms love humidity!). Make sure the soil is well drained and never water the foliage. Finally, opt for cultivars resistant to this disease.

cat face

It is a physiological disorder which causes malformation of the tomato, particularly where the tomato attaches to the stem (the apex). Affected fruits become deformed with brown cracks that extend deep into the flesh. It is generally the large-fruited tomato varieties that are the most sensitive. These deformations often occur when tomato flowers are exposed to temperatures below 15°C. Too much nitrogen fertilizer during flowering or the use of a herbicide/pesticide can also cause these deformations. However, it is not a disease and other fruits, produced in warmer weather, will not be affected.

In summary, growing tomatoes is not that difficult: give it rich, but well-drained soil, add calcium, add fertilizer monthly and water your plants regularly (preferably in the morning). If you follow these tips, you will have a fruitful harvest this summer.

Timing
Start tomatoes indoors in early April indoors under bright lights. Transplant into the garden at the mid to late May. Night-time temperatures need to be reliably above 10°C (50°F) to avoid shocking the seedlings. Before planting, pluck off the lower two thirds of branches and leaves to increase root growth. You won’t believe the difference in growth rate and especially in the yield.

Growing
Best to have them climb a trellis to save space and keep pests away. Indeterminate tomatoes keep shooting off new branches found in the crotch between a leaf and the main trunk. You need to pinch out these ‘suckers’ to keep the tomato plant from focusing the plant’s energy into producing fruit.

If you’re new to growing your own tomatoes by seed, the best time to get started in zone 6 is mid to late March. This way, you will be able to get a head start on the season. Depending on your last frost date, starting them in March will give you plenty of time to develop healthy seedlings. 

Starting tomatoes by seed will require adequate light and heat. You can use grow lights and heat mats. Or, if it’s not in your budget this year or you don’t have the space, you can also get your seeds started in a sunny windowsill or heated greenhouse. 

If you’re growing in a northern zone, look for varieties to plant that are cold hardy. This will help them to stand up a bit better to the fluctuating temperatures typical of growing in zone 6. 
Frequently asked questions about growing tomatoes by seed
How long do tomatoes take to grow from seed?

On average, tomatoes need about 4-8 weeks of growth indoors before they are ready to transplant outdoors. Transplanting them outdoors will depend on your local weather conditions and final frost date. 
What is the best month to plant tomato seeds?

If you’re growing in zones 5 or 6, the best month to get started growing tomatoes from seed indoors is March. Aim for mid to late March for best results. 
How many tomato seeds per hole?

When you are starting your tomato seeds, do not start more than 3 seeds in each cell or hole. You always want to plant a couple in each cell so you can ensure that you are able to get a viable seedling in case some seeds don’t take. If 2-3 take in the same cell, these will need to be thinned or separated into different containers for further growth. Otherwise, the seedlings will compete with each other for nutrients. 
What makes tomato seeds grow faster?

For healthy growth and development, tomato seeds will need adequate light and heat for the seeds to germinate. You can use grow lights, a sunny windowsill, or inside a heated greenhouse. Heat mats help to mimic the heat of the sun to support growth. 
Should I soak tomato seeds before planting?

If you recently purchased your seeds this year, you shouldn’t have to soak them to support germination. If your seeds are older and you are worried about germination rates, you can soak them in water for 24 hours before planting. Tomato seeds are usually still viable up to 4-6 years after purchase if stored correctly. 
What is the easiest tomato to grow from seed?

If you’re new to growing tomatoes by seed, you can never go wrong with growing cherry tomatoes. They are relatively easy to care for. And, many hybrid varieties are bred specifically for growing in containers if space is an issue for you. Cherry tomatoes are also great for growing with children. And, they make the perfect quick garden snack!

Most guides say to start tomatoes 6 to 8 weeks before the last frost date. However, this varies depending on the region you live in, and its associated USDA growing zone. As mentioned on our seed packets at Botanical Interests and our Epic Seeds, 4 to 6 weeks is sufficient. A little more lead time can assist with climate fluctuations and provides more time for tomato plant maturation.

For simplicity, we’ve created a list of zones and planting times. This is highly generalized, and the rest of this piece will address the nuance involved in starting and caring for tomato seedlings.

Heat-loving plants are going to have no spring frost date to contend with in the tropics, and people there may be able to start tomato seedlings outdoors at multiple points in the year. Those in more arctic climates need to have their seeds sown indoors in a space where they aren’t subject to the harsh cold. 

Here is a list of USDA hardiness zones and when to start tomatoes. To determine the time to start tomatoes in the southern hemisphere, refer to Worldwide Hardiness Zone maps:
Hardiness zone	When to sow tomato seeds indoors
Zone 3a	Start seeds early April through mid-April, transplant in late May and early June
Zone 3b and 4	Start seeds early March through mid-March, transplant in mid-April through early June
Zone 5 and 6	Start seeds early March through mid-March, transplant in mid-April through early June
Zone 7	Start seeds mid-February through early March, transplant early April through early June
Zone 8	Start seed mid-January through mid-February, transplant April through early July
Zone 9	Start seeds mid-January through mid-February, transplant in mid-March through mid-April, and again in early August
Zone 10a	Start seeds mid-January through mid-February, transplant in mid-March through mid-April, and again in early September
Zone 10b	Start seeds mid-January through mid-February, transplant in mid-March through mid-April, and again in early September through December

Areas with longer temperate seasons have more transplant timing options. In tropical regions, there are two very long growing seasons, once in summer, and again in fall.

In zone 8b, where I live, tomato growers have two fruiting phases: once in spring, and again in early fall. We spend our time in the intense summer heat keeping our tomato plants alive for a second harvest.

The average last frost date isn’t the only way to determine when to start, though. So, let’s tackle those factors below. 
Tomato Seed Starting Methods

The mode you choose for starting seeds indoors has an impact on how successfully your seedlings grow. Thankfully, winter gives most of us time to browse a seed catalog, or look at each seed package we’ve stored away for spring.

Those in more temperate or tropical regions might have to intentionally take a break to have the same amount of planning time. That’s because the soil temperature is warm enough for long periods, and warmer soil generally allows for healthier tomatoes. 

One thing is for sure: growing tomatoes from your own transplants with a good root system ties in directly to growing plants that produce great fruit. Here are a few ways to avoid weak seedlings that dampen your head start on the spring season. 
Space
A focused shot of a sprouting germ in a biodegradable container with soil near a window area and ample sunlight.
Sprouts need lots of direct sun.

How much space you have is the key to determining how to start. Tomato seed starting is more high maintenance than growing lettuces or kale, for instance. You’ll need a lot of direct sun, and most people starting in winter need a grow light to supplement a small sunny window on the south side of a home.

If you have enough to have room for an outdoor greenhouse that keeps seedlings out of freezing temperatures, you don’t need to clear any space indoors.
Ways to Start
A close-up shot of a tray with germs of a vegetable on top of a blue plate near a window, with a small garden shovel on the right about to pour soil
Placing them in a container near a window is a great option.

While a window is an adequate option for starting tomato seeds, you’ll need extra light and warmth from a light and heat mat, respectively. This goes for people who start seeds indoors, and for those who start in a greenhouse or grow tent.

A heating mat under the seed trays, pots, or starter blocks helps raise the soil temperature to 20°F more than the surrounding air if needed. Measure the temperature in the room, and adjust the mat controls so the seeds have several hours of 60 to 70°F (16-21°C) heat from below.

A grow light, as we’ve mentioned, is essential. Tomato seed starting requires light for germination. They need at least 8 hours of direct light to develop into sturdy seedlings. On a window sill, use a grow light to supplement, especially where obstructions block out the direct sun, or where the sun is scant to begin with.

South-facing windows are great for those in the northern hemisphere, while north-facing windows work best for those in the southern hemisphere. 

A grow tent gives you an enclosed space where your plants grow in optimal conditions. Like a starting setup with a grow light and heating mat, you can place grow tents anywhere they fit. Tents have easily controlled humidity, temperature, and light conditions that give you wiggle room in terms of timing.

Greenhouses are another indoor option for starting tomatoes. Thermal mass can be your heat source, and greenhouses can also allow for appropriate lighting. Supplement with grow lights as needed.

One awesome aspect of well-stocked greenhouses or grow tents is you’ll have more success growing year-round. Timing isn’t necessary once you get it down. These options are most viable for those with long winters. With climate controls, there are more options as to which tomato varieties you can grow.  
Planting

Let’s do a little run down of the steps for tomato seedling care in conjunction with timing. We’ll discuss sowing seed, caring for sprouts and seedlings, and troubleshooting issues that can arise in the process. 
Pre-Planting
A focused shot of a person's hand with germs of an edible cherry vegetable with its packet in the background. all the while the germs are to be placed on a black container.
The packet can give information about the time, space, and other qualities of the plant.

When the time comes to sow your tomato seeds think about a few things.

First, what kind of tomatoes do you want to grow? Are you going to grow determinate tomatoes, which stay smaller? Or do you want to grow indeterminate tomatoes that grow anywhere from 6 to 20 feet and require a trellis?

Another consideration when it comes to tomato varieties is what to do with ripe fruit. Maybe you want to grow sauce tomatoes or bush tomatoes. Or maybe you’d like to grow cherry tomatoes. Maybe heirloom varieties are most attractive to you as a gardener.

Regardless of type, follow the seed packet to some extent to determine timing, spacing, and consider the final destination for your plant. Seed packets often have a little more information about the particular species of tomato you are growing and what the basic needs will be. 
Sowing
A close-up shot of a person wearing a light khaki colored shirt sowing the germ of a vegetable in a biodegradable tray with 8 cells on top of a wooden surface
Sow them in multi-celled containers, preferably peat pots or egg trays.

The planting and potting accessories you use have a huge impact on the transplant process. Plastic starter pots and trays work, but they break down over time and could promote transplant shock in small seedlings. Peat pots can be planted whole in the garden without disturbance to the root ball.

We highly recommend our Epic 6-cell starting trays. They function just as plastic starter pots do, without the risk of shock, and they last a lifetime. They will ensure healthy transplants.

If you’d like to repurpose materials around your home for starting, yogurt cups are a great alternative. Egg cartons also work for germination. Egg cartons will biodegrade much like peat, but you will need to transplant your seedlings quickly into a larger container to allow for root development.

To start indoors, choose a receptacle and add a seed starting mix. Tamp it down gently. Do not overwhelm the seeds with fertilizer, as too much in the early stages burns plants and prevents germination.

Plant seeds in the 4 to 6 weeks before the last frost. Put two or three seeds in the soil at about ⅛ inch of depth. Cover them at the soil line and press down slightly. Then add enough water to get the soil moist. Keep it moist throughout the germination process.
Transplant Strategies
A close-up shot of a person's hand transplanting a seedling of a vegetable in a well lit area.
They prefer deep planting and adequate spacing.

So you’ve started your tomatoes super early, way outside the 6-8 week window. No problem, as long as proper climate controls exist and you’re willing to up-pot them before they head outdoors.

Don’t plant them outside in cold weather! Instead, take your seedlings and plant them in larger containers (gallon grow bags work) with potting mix amended with tomato food. They can stay indoors too. Care for them as you would outdoor plants, and give them good growing conditions. 

In regular timings, transplant seedlings carefully outside in your raised beds or whatever you use as soon as they are ready. Avoid disturbing the root ball. Place peat containers whole in the garden. The same goes for soil blocks that come from the starter cells we mentioned above.

Tomatoes enjoy deep planting. Make sure the entire stem is covered at the base. Provide adequate spacing between plants so they don’t overcrowd one another. 
Troubleshooting
A close-up shot of multiple potted vegetables in a wee lit area inside the house near windows
Ensure they get adequate water and ample light.

In the process of working with seedlings, you may encounter some issues. If you start early, you’ll have more time to work out situations that commonly arise when starting plants by seed.

Firstly, if you notice spindly seedlings, you could be watering too much with not enough light, or adding too much light with inadequate water. Because spindly seedlings make spindly plants, make adjustments in light and water quickly so you don’t end up with weak transplants. 

If the air temperature is too cold in your starting area, this could prevent germination. It could also prevent growth in already sprouted seedlings, and potentially create a situation where root rot and damping-off are possible. Heat, therefore, is an essential part of starting tomatoes. Light and heat mat placement, along with the ambient temperature is important. 

If you collect seed from a diseased plant (which can easily happen when the disease is not readily observable) and start it, that could cause damping-off or fungal and bacterial growth. Most seeds from large distributors have quality controls that prevent this, so order from reputable sources. Start questionable seeds away from others to prevent the spread of disease.   